current.sql -> desired.sql (postgresql)

Changes
 #   Change                                                                                  Risk
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 1   change values of enum type order_status from ('new', 'paid', 'shipped') to ('new',
     'paid', 'shipped', 'refunded')
 2   drop column customers.phone                                                             danger
 3   add column customers.loyalty_tier text NOT NULL                                         danger
 4   change type of customers.email from varchar(255) to varchar(120)                        danger
 5   create unique index ux_customers_email on customers (LOWER("email"))                    warning
 6   drop foreign key order_items (product_id) -> products (id)
 7   add foreign key order_items (product_id) -> products (id) ON DELETE RESTRICT            warning
 8   add check constraint on order_items ("quantity" > 0)                                    warning
 9   drop column orders.created                                                              danger
10   add column orders.created_at timestamptz NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP             warning
11   create index ix_orders_customer on orders (customer_id)                                 warning

Risks

DANGER  narrowing-type  customers.email
  customers.email changes from varchar(255) to the narrower varchar(120). Values longer than 120
  characters make the migration fail.
  Safer: Check the data with the query below and clean up values that do not fit, or keep the wider
  type.
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "customers" WHERE length("customers"."email") > 120

DANGER  add-not-null-column  customers.loyalty_tier
  customers.loyalty_tier is added as NOT NULL without a default, which fails as soon as customers
  holds any row: existing rows would have no value.
  Safer: Add the column as nullable or with a DEFAULT, fill it for existing rows, then make it NOT
  NULL in a later step. In PostgreSQL 11 and later, ADD COLUMN with a constant DEFAULT is instant.
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "customers"

DANGER  drop-column  customers.phone
  Dropping customers.phone permanently deletes its value in every row.
  Safer: Stop reading and writing the column in the application and deploy that first, back the
  values up, then drop the column in a later migration (expand and contract).
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "customers" WHERE "customers"."phone" IS NOT NULL

DANGER  drop-column  orders.created
  Dropping orders.created permanently deletes its value in every row.
  Safer: Stop reading and writing the column in the application and deploy that first, back the
  values up, then drop the column in a later migration (expand and contract).
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "orders" WHERE "orders"."created" IS NOT NULL

WARNING  check-violations  check on order_items ("quantity" > 0)
  Rows already in order_items may violate CHECK ("quantity" > 0), which makes the migration fail.
  PostgreSQL checks every row while holding an ACCESS EXCLUSIVE lock that blocks reads and writes.
  Safer: Fix the violating rows first. On a large table, add the constraint with NOT VALID and run
  ALTER TABLE ... VALIDATE CONSTRAINT separately; validating does not block writes.
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "order_items" WHERE NOT ("quantity" > 0)

WARNING  possible-rename  column orders.created
  Column orders.created is dropped and created_at is added with the same shape; this looks like a
  rename (confidence 89%). As written, the migration deletes its values instead of keeping them.
  Safer: If it is a rename, run with --detect-renames to generate a RENAME, which keeps the data.
  Otherwise, make sure the data is no longer needed.

WARNING  type-rewrite  customers.email
  Changing customers.email from varchar(255) to varchar(120) makes PostgreSQL rewrite the whole
  table and its indexes while holding an ACCESS EXCLUSIVE lock that blocks reads and writes.
  Safer: On a large table, add a new column of the new type, backfill it in batches, switch the
  application over and drop the old column; otherwise run the migration in a maintenance window.

WARNING  foreign-key  foreign key order_items (product_id) -> products
  Adding the foreign key checks every row of order_items while holding SHARE ROW EXCLUSIVE locks on
  order_items and products, which block writes to both; rows without a match make the migration
  fail.
  Safer: Add the constraint with NOT VALID, which only takes a brief lock, then run ALTER TABLE ...
  VALIDATE CONSTRAINT in a separate transaction; validating does not block writes.
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT count(*) FROM "order_items" AS child WHERE child."product_id" IS NOT NULL AND NOT EXISTS
    (SELECT 1 FROM "products" AS parent WHERE parent."id" = child."product_id")

WARNING  index-lock  index ix_orders_customer on orders
  Building ix_orders_customer blocks inserts, updates and deletes on orders (SHARE lock) until the
  whole table has been indexed.
  Safer: Run with --concurrent-indexes to build it with CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY outside the
  transaction: it takes longer but does not block writes.

WARNING  index-lock  index ux_customers_email on customers
  Building ux_customers_email blocks inserts, updates and deletes on customers (SHARE lock) until
  the whole table has been indexed.
  Safer: Run with --concurrent-indexes to build it with CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY outside the
  transaction: it takes longer but does not block writes.

WARNING  unique-duplicates  unique index on customers (LOWER("email"))
  Rows already in customers may contain duplicates of (LOWER("email")), which make adding the unique
  index fail.
  Safer: Remove the duplicates first.
  Check before migrating:
    SELECT LOWER("email"), count(*) FROM "customers" WHERE LOWER("email") IS NOT NULL GROUP BY
    LOWER("email") HAVING count(*) > 1

11 changes, 11 risks: 4 danger, 7 warning.
